If you're just scrolling, it looks
pretty real to me. If you're not taking
a very close look,
and that's why [music] this one is so
dangerous.
Robert Habeck was the Green Party leader
and Vice Chancellor of Germany. At the
end [music] of 2024, he was in the midst
of an election campaign when a video
[music] surfaced on the internet.
He had visited [music]
this school in Germany in 2017, and
there was a picture of him with some
students in a local newspaper.
Flash forward to 2024, and one of the
young students that he was pictured with
years before is claiming that he had
sexually assaulted her when he visited
that school.
I said, "What? If this is going to break
through and it's reported in the media,
everything is over and I can't show
myself on the streets."
The important thing about this video
[music] is that it's fake.
It's one example of a slew of videos
produced by [music] a group inside
Russia.
We're in the golden age of
disinformation.
Russia has really stepped up its spread
of fabricated reports. It's targeting
[music]
social media platforms using influencers
and AI-generated content. They sow
chaos, they sow [music] doubts, and they
undermine the truth.
>> [music]
[music]
>> When I look at her and I'm watching
this, I don't speak German, so I don't
know what she's saying, but I'm having
this sensation of there's something
wrong with her face.
If you're just scrolling, it might look
normal, especially on a phone, but on a
big screen, it's quite clear
that her eyes aren't quite right. She's
blinking sort of oddly. Her eyes are
changing size slightly as she's
speaking, and her face doesn't match
what she's doing with her mouth.
>> It's not like a master class in like
filmmaking or artistry. What it is is
they can travel.
The ultimate goal is to get ordinary
people talking about it, thinking about
it, considering it, which is why it's so
dangerous to not
take this stuff down. When we started
digging deeper,
and we found more examples of similar
videos, we realized [music] this was a
distinct campaign that other researchers
had identified as well as government
officials. We've seen governments
[music] talk about election interference
and disinformation campaigns, but what
was really different about this is they
came out and they attributed it
not just to Russia, but to a very
specific Russian group. You almost never
see that.
Storm 1516 is really a new approach
[music] or methodology that Russia has
adopted to spread disinformation.
I spent so many hours scrolling through
social media looking at these videos,
and I realized [music] that so many
people believe these stories.
It's a very murky operation. [music]
It's backed by the GRU, Russia's
military intelligence agency. We also
believe that this effort is led overall
from the Kremlin by a man named [music]
Sergey Kiriyenko, who is Putin's first
deputy chief of the presidential
administration. [music]
Russia has been targeting the West with
fake reports for years. The
disinformation is absolutely central to
Soviet strategy for defeating what the
KGB calls the main enemy, that is the
United States, without firing a shot.
Back in the Soviet period, they
invented, most famously, the conspiracy
theory [music] that HIV was cooked up in
a US lab.
And so what I did was snap the image,
and then I put her through facial
recognition software. It comes up
with the image
of a Russian [music] figure skater by
the name of Yulia Lipnitskaya, who
became well-known in Russia for winning
a medal during the Sochi 2014 games. I
highly doubt [music] it's this Russian
figure skater who's acting for money,
but it looks like what they've done is
they've taken the images of this woman,
Yulia Lipnitskaya, and imposed [music]
her face on a real actor, and then
manipulated her face with AI animation
software.
It's really important for them to mix
real news with [music] fake news. You
know, so many
young women have come out with similar
allegations against powerful [music]
men, so they're picking up on a theme
that they know is very divisive.
I could show you the magic of a Storm
1516 video and why it looks
silly, but is actually genius.
My name is Darren Linvill, and I am
co-director of the hub and professor in
the Department of Communication here at
Clemson. I read Russian
>> [music]
>> troll tweets until my eyes bled.
Uh and we learned
just an amazing amount.
Storm 1516 [music]
is a narrative laundering campaign.
Narrative laundering starts by
creating a story.
>> [music]
>> Sometimes that story is
put onto a purpose-built website.
And then they use
all kinds of different resources to
layer that narrative, layer that story
into the conversation.
>> [music]
>> It may mean Russian state media layering
those stories into the conversation.
[music] It definitely and and most often
involves
real influencers. [music] And those
influencers then layer in that Russian
narrative until integration, where it
just becomes part of the conversation,
[music] where real people are repeating
it and talking about it.
You get to the point where when you see
one of these Storm 1516 narratives, you
don't have to look very hard to realize,
"Oh, yeah, that's them."
One technique that Storm 1516 very often
uses is a whistleblower format. Maybe
it's a journalist who has uncovered
something that they think is going to
blow the whistle on something. Maybe
it's someone who's placed within a
government who has a story to tell. And
we started these trials to help children
not to injure them or murder them. Their
videos look the same. They repeatedly
use, for instance, members of the West
African diaspora community who live in
St. Petersburg as actors.
We've seen them use AI in some of their
videos in sort of subtle ways to mask a
particular individual who's speaking, to
change the vocal patterns. There's a set
of narratives that Russia has pushed
consistently over time. Issues that have
cleaver points within the [music]
discourse that the Russians want to push
on. Maybe a a wound that the Russians
want to rub salt in. For instance, that
Zelenskyy is corrupt, [music] that he is
using Western aid money to buy
extravagant items. President Zelenskyy
uses proxies to hide ownership of two
yachts worth $75 million. This was a
narrative that not only went viral on
social media, but it was repeated by
various US policy makers. We're getting
easily a half a trillion dollars in the
hole for the Ukraine conflict. Why? So
that one of Zelenskyy's ministers can
buy a bigger yacht?
It's these false Russian narratives
repeated over and over and over again,
and you can't get me to believe that
that doesn't have some effect on how a
large portion of Americans view the war
in Ukraine.
They're trying to not tell people
what to think. They're trying to
influence
the conversation.
After Trump won the election in 2024, I
think
>> [music]
>> Russia really turned its focus to Europe
where the real support for Ukraine
remained. Certainly these issues are
taken more seriously in Europe. They are
much more targeted by Russian
disinformation.
>> [music]
[music]
>> The thing is actually this this event
was referring to a real event. So date
and time 15 years ago, they are true. So
I visited school as a minister in the
northernmost part of Germany in the
state of Schleswig-Holstein. It's not
the girl who I met 15 years ago and the
girl herself was saying the family was
saying
this is just a lie. So we have nothing
to do with it. So if you are just a
normal user of social media, you see it.
You might
tend to believe it.
The video with the allegations against
Habeck was shared by a German language
influencer who posts a lot of Storm 1516
content. The real core of the success of
Storm 1516
has evolved into being about the
influencers.
There's one individual in particular,
Cheboygan. This individual is a Irish
journalist, independent journalist.
We've been warning you about this
corruption
in this complete basket case country
called Ukraine for years. I suppose I'll
get told Russian disinformation too that
tens of thousands of people are
literally running away from the Nacho
Führer's army.
He's so clearly working on behalf of
Russian disinformation efforts.
He has regularly shared Storm 1516
content. And he shared the video
alleging that ballots with votes for the
AFD were being shredded systematically.
His post got half a million views. It
was also posted by someone else and got
almost 4 million views.
The German authorities called this out
warning the public not to believe it
saying the paper is different, the
typeface is different, but you know,
they have made a concerted effort here
to make this look as realistic as
possible.
>> Yeah, clearly it was resonating with
lots of people. And the the fact that
it's AFD ballots being shredded, what's
what's the narrative that plays into?
>> Exactly. Well, AFD, Germany's far-right
party, it is pro-Russian.
Um has called for closer ties with
Moscow, um called for the lifting of
sanctions on Russia.
In the election, the AFD got 21% of the
vote, which was [music] over double what
they'd gotten 4 years earlier.
On the other hand, the Green Party's
[music] vote share fell and Robert
Habeck went on to resign his
parliamentary seat.
Perhaps the only silver lining for
Habeck is that the video targeting him
didn't go viral in part because of
efforts to block the [music] post on X
in Germany.
I had to sleep at night, but in the
morning as no media was reporting about
it, I was really relieved, I can say.
This [music] disgusting video was not a
success. Still the whole way of
disinformation campaign is successful.
Even though the story [music] against
Habeck didn't spread, you can still find
the video on X outside Germany and I
think that's significant.
If you look at the timeline of it,
>> [music]
>> Elon Musk takes over X in 2022
and Storm 1516 starts to get going
[music] in August 2023.
And really just takes off.
There's also the question of regulation
in the US. Last year, the Justice
Department shut down the FBI's foreign
influence [music] task force, which was
coordinating a lot of the US
government's efforts on this front to
expose foreign-backed disinformation.
And I think with the US agencies
standing down on this front, it's really
Europe that's left monitoring it and
trying to expose [music] it and trying
to regulate the social media giants.
Storm 1516 has captured eyeballs like no
other Russian [music] operation before.
We've seen them ramp up the rate at
which they've been targeting elections,
not just in the United States, but
around the world.
And there's every reason to believe
they'll continue to do that.
I think in many ways they're just
getting started.
>> [music]
[music]